docs/user-guide.md, before:

# Quick-Start Guide

**Gscrib** is a **Python library** that helps you write clean, flexible,
and reliable **G-code** for CNC machines, 3D printers or laser cutters.
All this without writing a single G-code line!

**This guide will walk you through**:

* Installing Gscrib.
* Writing your first G-code script in Python.
* Automating, customizing, and controlling toolpaths.
* Exploring advanced features for more complex projects.

---

## Introduction

Writing raw G-code by hand is often slow, repetitive, and error-prone.
**Gscrib** solves this by letting you write simple, readable, and easy to
maintain **Python code** to describe your toolpaths, which it converts
into clean, correct **G-code** for you.

**Benefits**:

- Write machine logic in Python, not raw G-code.
- Control complex movements with simple scripts.
- Build safer, more reliable machine programs.

## Installation

To use **Gscrib**, you need to have **Python 3.10 or newer** installed on
your computer. You'll also need **Pip** to install the library. If you're
new to Python or Pip, these links will help you get set up:

- [Python Downloads](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [Pip Installation Guide](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/installation/)

Once you're set up, open your terminal and install **Gscrib** with:

```bash
pip install gscrib
```

That's it! This will download and install **Gscrib** and any other software
it needs to work. Once installed, you're ready to start using Gscrib in
your Python scripts.

## Writing Your First Gscrib Program

Let's write a super simple program that creates a G-code file (output.gcode)
to move your machine from point A to point B:

```python
from gscrib import GCodeBuilder

g = GCodeBuilder(output="output.gcode")

g.set_axis(x=0, y=0, z=0)     # Set start position
g.rapid(z=5)                  # Move Z axis up quickly
g.rapid(x=10, y=10)           # Move to X=10, Y=10
g.tool_on("clockwise", 1000)  # Turn on the tool at 1000 RPM
g.move(x=20, y=20, F=1500)    # Move to X=20, Y=20 at feed rate 1500
g.tool_off()                  # Turn off the tool
g.teardown()                  # Finalize and save the file
```

This is a very basic example. Once you're comfortable, you can add loops,
curves, safety checks, and even export directly to your CNC. All using
Python's full power.

## Features at a Glance

Gscrib isn't just about simple moves. Here's a quick overview of its key
capabilities:

- **Path Interpolation**: Easily create circles, arcs, spirals, helices,
  splines, and more.
- **State Awareness**: Tracks your machine's position, tool status, and
  safety limits automatically.
- **Hooks & Customization**: Use simple Python functions to add custom
  behavior.
- **Transformations**: Move, scale, rotate, and mirror your toolpaths
  without rewriting coordinates.
- **Safe Output**: Export to G-code files or send instructions directly
  to your machine.

## Full Example: Drilling a Grid of Holes

This example demonstrates how to generate a G-code program to drill a
grid of holes, combining Python loops with G-code generation. It covers
the setup, drilling, and finalization steps.

```python
from itertools import product
from gscrib import GCodeBuilder

# Set work parameters

file_name = "grid_holes.gcode"    # Output file name
feed_rate = 500                   # Feed rate (mm/min)
safe_z = 10                       # Safe Z position (1 cm above surface)
work_z = -5                       # Drill depth (5 mm below surface)

with GCodeBuilder(output=file_name) as g:

    # Set machine bounds (limits for movement)
    g.set_bounds("axes", min=(0, 0, -50), max=(100, 100, 50))

    # Configure settings for the program

    g.set_axis(point=(0, 0, 0))        # Tool is at the origin
    g.set_length_units("millimeters")  # Set units to millimeters
    g.set_time_units("seconds")        # Set time units to seconds
    g.set_distance_mode("absolute")    # Set absolute positioning mode
    g.set_feed_rate(feed_rate)         # Set speed of tool movement

    # Activate the tool and coolant system

    g.rapid(z=safe_z)                  # Rapid move to safe Z
    g.tool_on("clockwise", 1000)       # Start the tool (1000 rpm)
    g.coolant_on("flood")              # Turn on flood coolant
    g.sleep(1)                         # Dwell for 1 second

    # Drill a 5x5 grid of holes, each 10 mm apart. The `product` function
    # generates (x, y) coordinate pairs for a 5x5 grid.

    for x, y in product(range(0, 50, 10), repeat=2):
        g.rapid(point=(x, y))          # Rapid move to the hole position
        g.move(z=work_z)               # Drill down to 5 mm depth
        g.rapid(z=safe_z)              # Rapid move to safe Z

    # Program termination

    g.tool_off()                       # Turn off the tool
    g.coolant_off()                    # Turn off the coolant
    g.rapid(x=0, y=0)                  # Rapid move back to origin
    g.stop()                           # Halt the program
```

This script generates a G-code file that drills a 5x5 grid of holes, each
spaced 10 mm apart. The use of loops makes it easy to scale or modify the
pattern, demonstrating the flexibility of Python for G-code generation.

## Sending G-code with Writers

By default, Gscrib can save your generated G-code to a file using the
`output` option when you create a [GCodeBuilder](#GCodeBuilder). But you
can also send it anywhere: the console, a serial port, or over a network.
Gscrib uses writers to handle this. You can mix and match as many writers
as you like. Gscrib will send each G-code line to all registered writers,
so you can save to a file, print to the console, and send to a machine
all at once if you like.

Basic setup looks like this:

```python
from gscrib import GCodeBuilder

g = GCodeBuilder(
    output='output.gcode',  # Save to a file
    print_lines=True,       # Also print each line to stdout
    direct_write='serial',  # Or send directly to a machine via serial
    host='192.168.0.100',   # Host/IP for network (socket mode)
    port=8000,              # Port number for network or serial
    baudrate=250000         # Baud rate for serial connections
)
```

You can also add writers manually with `add_writer()`. Gscrib includes
ready-made writers in [gscrib.writers](#gscrib.writers) for files, serial
ports, sockets, and the console.

## Beyond Basics

### Path Interpolation

Draw curves, arcs, spirals, helices, and threads with single commands.

```python
# Clockwise arc
g.set_direction("clockwise")
g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Counterclockwise arc
g.set_direction("counter")
g.trace.arc(target=(0, 0), center=(0, -10))

# Spline curve through a series of control points
control_points = [(0, 0), (5, 10), (10, -5), (15, 0)]
g.trace.spline(control_points)

# Helix
g.trace.helix(target=(10, 0, 10), center=(-10, 0), turns=3)

# Spiral
g.trace.spiral(target=(10, 0), turns=2)

# Thread
g.trace.thread(target=(10, 0, 5), pitch=1)
```

### Advanced Path Interpolation

Use mathematical functions to generate parametric curves and complex
shapes dynamically.

```python
import numpy as np

# Custom parametric circle function
def circle(thetas):
    x = 10 * np.cos(2 * np.pi * thetas)
    y = 10 * np.sin(2 * np.pi * thetas)
    z = np.zeros_like(thetas)
    return np.column_stack((x, y, z))

# Estimate path length
length = g.trace.estimate_length(100, circle)

# Interpolate the path
g.set_resolution(0.1)
g.trace.parametric(circle, length)
```

### Transforming Paths

Transformations make it easy to shift, rotate, scale, or mirror your
entire design without manually adjusting coordinates.

```python
# Save current transformation state
g.transform.save_state()

# Translate 10 units along X and Y
g.transform.translate(x=10, y=10)

# Change the pivot point for the next transformation
g.transform.set_pivot(point=(5, 5, 0))

# Rotate 45 degrees around Z-axis
g.transform.rotate(angle=45, axis="z")

# Trace an arc in the transformed coordinate system
g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Restore original state before transformations
g.transform.restore_state()
```

By default, transformations are pushed to and popped from a stack, but
you can assign names to them to reuse your custom coordinate systems.

```python
# Save a transformation state with a name
g.transform.save_state("my_transorm")

# Rotate and scale the coordinate system
g.transform.rotate(angle=90, axis="z")
g.transform.scale(2.0)
g.move(x=10, y=10)

# Restore the transformation state
g.transform.restore_state("my_transorm")

# Trace an arc in the restored coordinate system
g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))
```

### State Tracking And Validation

Easily track and manage the machine's state during operations, including
tool activity, position, feed rates, and more. The state is updated
automatically as actions are performed.

```python
# Set the initial position and feed rate
g.set_axis(x=0, y=0, z=0)
g.set_distance_mode("relative")
g.set_feed_rate(1200)

# Activate the tool and move to a position
g.tool_on("cw", 1000)
g.move(x=10, y=10)

# Access and print the current state
print(f"Tool Active: { g.state.is_tool_active }")    # True
print(f"Tool Power: { g.state.tool_power }")         # S=1000
print(f"Feed Rate: { g.state.feed_rate }")           # F=1200
print(f"Position: { g.state.position }")             # X=10, Y=10, Z=0

# Move again with an updated feed rate
g.move(x=20, y=20, F=800)

# State automatically reflects the changes
print(f"Feed Rate: { g.state.feed_rate }")           # F=800
print(f"Position: { g.state.position }")             # X=30, Y=30, Z=0

# Attempt to change the spindle direction while the tool is active
g.tool_on("ccw", 2000)    # This will raise a ToolStateError
```

### Enforcing Parameter Limits

Safe operating ranges for key machine parameters can be set using
`set_bounds()`. This helps prevent invalid or potentially dangerous
values during runtime. Once bounds are set, any command that violates
them will raise an exception.

```python
# Define safety bounds for different machine parameters
g.set_bounds("bed-temperature", min=0, max=200)
g.set_bounds("chamber-temperature", min=0, max=60)
g.set_bounds("hotend-temperature", min=0, max=200)
g.set_bounds("feed-rate", min=100, max=7000)
g.set_bounds("tool-number", min=1, max=5)
g.set_bounds("tool-power", min=0, max=100)

# You can also constrain motion in 3D space
g.set_bounds("axes", min=(0, 0, -10), max=(20, 20, 10))

# These will raise exceptions due to being out of bounds
g.set_feed_rate(10000)    # Exceeds max feed rate
g.move(x=5, y=5, F=10)    # Below min feed rate
g.move(x=-100)            # Outside defined X-axis range
```

### Dynamic Behavior with Hooks

Sometimes, you'll want to automatically adjust machine parameters while
generating paths. That's where hooks shine, allowing you to modify
parameters dynamically.

```python
import math

# Custom extrusion hook function
def extrude_hook(origin, target, params, state):
    dt = target - origin
    length = math.hypot(dt.x, dt.y, dt.z)
    params.update(E=0.1 * length) # Add extrusion parameter
    return params

g.add_hook(extrude_hook)
g.move(x=10, y=0)   # Will add E=1.0
g.move(x=20, y=10)  # Will add E=1.414
g.move(x=10, y=10)  # Will add E=1.0
g.remove_hook(extrude_hook)
```

For basic extrusion, Gscrib also provides a built-in hook for you:

```python
from gscrib.hooks import extrusion_hook

hook_function = extrusion_hook(
    layer_height = 0.2,
    nozzle_diameter = 0.4,
    filament_diameter = 1.75
)

with g.move_hook(hook_function)
    g.move(x=10, y=0)
```

### Read Device Sensors

In **direct write mode**, machine data such as position, temperature, and
other sensor values can be read directly from the connected device. This
allows the program to be dynamically adjusted based on the current state
of the machine.

```python
g = GCodeBuilder(direct_write="socket")
writer = g.get_writer()

g.query("position")             # Request position data
X = writer.get_parameter("X")   # Get X position
Y = writer.get_parameter("Y")   # Get Y position
Z = writer.get_parameter("Z")   # Get Z position
E = writer.get_parameter("E")   # Get extruder position

g.query("temperature")          # Request temperature data
T = writer.get_parameter("T")   # Get tool temperature
B = writer.get_parameter("B")   # Get bed temperature

g.probe("towards", Z=0, F=100)  # Probe towards Z=0
g.sleep(duration=0)             # Wait for probe to complete
g.query("position")             # Request position
Z = writer.get_parameter("Z")   # Get Z position after probing
```

Some controllers, like Grbl, may not support the ``g.query()`` command.
In such cases, these controllers may automatically report data like
position in real-time without needing a specific query, or raw G-code
such as ``g.write("?")`` can be used to query the position.

### Context Managers

Context managers help you write cleaner, safer code by providing a
convenient way to temporarily modify settings, apply transformations, or
add hooks during operations, and automatically restore the previous state
once the block finishes.

```python
# Switch to absolute positioning for a specific operation
with g.absolute_mode():
    g.rapid(x=0, y=0)

# Switch to relative positioning for a specific operation
with g.relative_mode():
    g.move(x=10)
    g.move(y=10)

# Apply a transformation within a specific context
with g.current_transform():
    g.transform.rotate(angle=45, axis="z")
    g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Restore and apply a named transformation
with g.named_transform("my_transform"):
    g.transform.rotate(angle=45, axis="z")
    g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Add a custom hook for the duration of the operation
with g.move_hook(temporary_hook):
    g.move(x=10, y=10)
```

## Where to Go Next

Ready to go deeper? Explore the [full API reference](#gscrib) for more
examples, tips, and best practices. Start with [GCodeCore](#GCodeCore)
and [GCodeBuilder](#GCodeBuilder), they're the foundation of **Gscrib**.

Commit message:

Deprecate Pip in favor of Poetry

docs/user-guide.md, after:

# Quick-Start Guide

**Gscrib** is a **Python library** that helps you write clean, flexible,
and reliable **G-code** for CNC machines, 3D printers or laser cutters.
All this without writing a single G-code line!

**This guide will walk you through**:

* Installing Gscrib.
* Writing your first G-code script in Python.
* Automating, customizing, and controlling toolpaths.
* Exploring advanced features for more complex projects.

---

## Introduction

Writing raw G-code by hand is often slow, repetitive, and error-prone.
**Gscrib** solves this by letting you write simple, readable, and easy to
maintain **Python code** to describe your toolpaths, which it converts
into clean, correct **G-code** for you.

**Benefits**:

- Write machine logic in Python, not raw G-code.
- Control complex movements with simple scripts.
- Build safer, more reliable machine programs.

## Installation

To use **Gscrib**, you need to have **Python 3.10 or newer** installed on
your computer. You'll also need **Poetry** to install the library. If you're
new to Python or Poetry, these links will help you get set up:

- [Python Downloads](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [Poetry Installation Guide](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)

Once you're set up, open your terminal and install **Gscrib** with:

```bash
poetry init --no-interaction
poetry add gscrib
```

That's it! This will download and install **Gscrib** and any other software
it needs to work. Once installed, you're ready to start using Gscrib in
your Python scripts.

## Writing Your First Gscrib Program

Let's write a super simple program that creates a G-code file
(```output.gcode```) to move your machine from point A to point B:

1. **Save the following code** into a file named ```test.py```:

```python
from gscrib import GCodeBuilder

g = GCodeBuilder(output="output.gcode")

g.set_axis(x=0, y=0, z=0)     # Set start position
g.rapid(z=5)                  # Move Z axis up quickly
g.rapid(x=10, y=10)           # Move to X=10, Y=10
g.tool_on("clockwise", 1000)  # Turn on the tool at 1000 RPM
g.move(x=20, y=20, F=1500)    # Move to X=20, Y=20 at feed rate 1500
g.tool_off()                  # Turn off the tool
g.teardown()                  # Finalize and save the file
```

2. **Run the program** using Poetry (this ensures it uses the correct
   virtual environment):

```bash
poetry run python test.py
```

You should now have a file named ```output.gcode``` in your project folder.
You can open it in a text editor to see the generated G-code. This is a very
basic example. Once you're comfortable, you can add loops, curves, safety
checks, and even export directly to your CNC. All using Python's full power.

## Features at a Glance

Gscrib isn't just about simple moves. Here's a quick overview of its key
capabilities:

- **Path Interpolation**: Easily create circles, arcs, spirals, helices,
  splines, and more.
- **State Awareness**: Tracks your machine's position, tool status, and
  safety limits automatically.
- **Hooks & Customization**: Use simple Python functions to add custom
  behavior.
- **Transformations**: Move, scale, rotate, and mirror your toolpaths
  without rewriting coordinates.
- **Safe Output**: Export to G-code files or send instructions directly
  to your machine.

## Full Example: Drilling a Grid of Holes

This example demonstrates how to generate a G-code program to drill a
grid of holes, combining Python loops with G-code generation. It covers
the setup, drilling, and finalization steps.

```python
from itertools import product
from gscrib import GCodeBuilder

# Set work parameters

file_name = "grid_holes.gcode"    # Output file name
feed_rate = 500                   # Feed rate (mm/min)
safe_z = 10                       # Safe Z position (1 cm above surface)
work_z = -5                       # Drill depth (5 mm below surface)

with GCodeBuilder(output=file_name) as g:

    # Set machine bounds (limits for movement)
    g.set_bounds("axes", min=(0, 0, -50), max=(100, 100, 50))

    # Configure settings for the program

    g.set_axis(point=(0, 0, 0))        # Tool is at the origin
    g.set_length_units("millimeters")  # Set units to millimeters
    g.set_time_units("seconds")        # Set time units to seconds
    g.set_distance_mode("absolute")    # Set absolute positioning mode
    g.set_feed_rate(feed_rate)         # Set speed of tool movement

    # Activate the tool and coolant system

    g.rapid(z=safe_z)                  # Rapid move to safe Z
    g.tool_on("clockwise", 1000)       # Start the tool (1000 rpm)
    g.coolant_on("flood")              # Turn on flood coolant
    g.sleep(1)                         # Dwell for 1 second

    # Drill a 5x5 grid of holes, each 10 mm apart. The `product` function
    # generates (x, y) coordinate pairs for a 5x5 grid.

    for x, y in product(range(0, 50, 10), repeat=2):
        g.rapid(point=(x, y))          # Rapid move to the hole position
        g.move(z=work_z)               # Drill down to 5 mm depth
        g.rapid(z=safe_z)              # Rapid move to safe Z

    # Program termination

    g.tool_off()                       # Turn off the tool
    g.coolant_off()                    # Turn off the coolant
    g.rapid(x=0, y=0)                  # Rapid move back to origin
    g.stop()                           # Halt the program
```

This script generates a G-code file that drills a 5x5 grid of holes, each
spaced 10 mm apart. The use of loops makes it easy to scale or modify the
pattern, demonstrating the flexibility of Python for G-code generation.

## Sending G-code with Writers

By default, Gscrib can save your generated G-code to a file using the
`output` option when you create a [GCodeBuilder](#GCodeBuilder). But you
can also send it anywhere: the console, a serial port, or over a network.
Gscrib uses writers to handle this. You can mix and match as many writers
as you like. Gscrib will send each G-code line to all registered writers,
so you can save to a file, print to the console, and send to a machine
all at once if you like.

Basic setup looks like this:

```python
from gscrib import GCodeBuilder

g = GCodeBuilder(
    output='output.gcode',  # Save to a file
    print_lines=True,       # Also print each line to stdout
    direct_write='serial',  # Or send directly to a machine via serial
    host='192.168.0.100',   # Host/IP for network (socket mode)
    port=8000,              # Port number for network or serial
    baudrate=250000         # Baud rate for serial connections
)
```

You can also add writers manually with `add_writer()`. Gscrib includes
ready-made writers in [gscrib.writers](#gscrib.writers) for files, serial
ports, sockets, and the console.

## Beyond Basics

### Path Interpolation

Draw curves, arcs, spirals, helices, and threads with single commands.

```python
# Clockwise arc
g.set_direction("clockwise")
g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Counterclockwise arc
g.set_direction("counter")
g.trace.arc(target=(0, 0), center=(0, -10))

# Spline curve through a series of control points
control_points = [(0, 0), (5, 10), (10, -5), (15, 0)]
g.trace.spline(control_points)

# Helix
g.trace.helix(target=(10, 0, 10), center=(-10, 0), turns=3)

# Spiral
g.trace.spiral(target=(10, 0), turns=2)

# Thread
g.trace.thread(target=(10, 0, 5), pitch=1)
```

### Advanced Path Interpolation

Use mathematical functions to generate parametric curves and complex
shapes dynamically.

```python
import numpy as np

# Custom parametric circle function
def circle(thetas):
    x = 10 * np.cos(2 * np.pi * thetas)
    y = 10 * np.sin(2 * np.pi * thetas)
    z = np.zeros_like(thetas)
    return np.column_stack((x, y, z))

# Estimate path length
length = g.trace.estimate_length(100, circle)

# Interpolate the path
g.set_resolution(0.1)
g.trace.parametric(circle, length)
```

### Transforming Paths

Transformations make it easy to shift, rotate, scale, or mirror your
entire design without manually adjusting coordinates.

```python
# Save current transformation state
g.transform.save_state()

# Translate 10 units along X and Y
g.transform.translate(x=10, y=10)

# Change the pivot point for the next transformation
g.transform.set_pivot(point=(5, 5, 0))

# Rotate 45 degrees around Z-axis
g.transform.rotate(angle=45, axis="z")

# Trace an arc in the transformed coordinate system
g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Restore original state before transformations
g.transform.restore_state()
```

By default, transformations are pushed to and popped from a stack, but
you can assign names to them to reuse your custom coordinate systems.

```python
# Save a transformation state with a name
g.transform.save_state("my_transorm")

# Rotate and scale the coordinate system
g.transform.rotate(angle=90, axis="z")
g.transform.scale(2.0)
g.move(x=10, y=10)

# Restore the transformation state
g.transform.restore_state("my_transorm")

# Trace an arc in the restored coordinate system
g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))
```

### State Tracking And Validation

Easily track and manage the machine's state during operations, including
tool activity, position, feed rates, and more. The state is updated
automatically as actions are performed.

```python
# Set the initial position and feed rate
g.set_axis(x=0, y=0, z=0)
g.set_distance_mode("relative")
g.set_feed_rate(1200)

# Activate the tool and move to a position
g.tool_on("cw", 1000)
g.move(x=10, y=10)

# Access and print the current state
print(f"Tool Active: { g.state.is_tool_active }")    # True
print(f"Tool Power: { g.state.tool_power }")         # S=1000
print(f"Feed Rate: { g.state.feed_rate }")           # F=1200
print(f"Position: { g.state.position }")             # X=10, Y=10, Z=0

# Move again with an updated feed rate
g.move(x=20, y=20, F=800)

# State automatically reflects the changes
print(f"Feed Rate: { g.state.feed_rate }")           # F=800
print(f"Position: { g.state.position }")             # X=30, Y=30, Z=0

# Attempt to change the spindle direction while the tool is active
g.tool_on("ccw", 2000)    # This will raise a ToolStateError
```

### Enforcing Parameter Limits

Safe operating ranges for key machine parameters can be set using
`set_bounds()`. This helps prevent invalid or potentially dangerous
values during runtime. Once bounds are set, any command that violates
them will raise an exception.

```python
# Define safety bounds for different machine parameters
g.set_bounds("bed-temperature", min=0, max=200)
g.set_bounds("chamber-temperature", min=0, max=60)
g.set_bounds("hotend-temperature", min=0, max=200)
g.set_bounds("feed-rate", min=100, max=7000)
g.set_bounds("tool-number", min=1, max=5)
g.set_bounds("tool-power", min=0, max=100)

# You can also constrain motion in 3D space
g.set_bounds("axes", min=(0, 0, -10), max=(20, 20, 10))

# These will raise exceptions due to being out of bounds
g.set_feed_rate(10000)    # Exceeds max feed rate
g.move(x=5, y=5, F=10)    # Below min feed rate
g.move(x=-100)            # Outside defined X-axis range
```

### Dynamic Behavior with Hooks

Sometimes, you'll want to automatically adjust machine parameters while
generating paths. That's where hooks shine, allowing you to modify
parameters dynamically.

```python
import math

# Custom extrusion hook function
def extrude_hook(origin, target, params, state):
    dt = target - origin
    length = math.hypot(dt.x, dt.y, dt.z)
    params.update(E=0.1 * length) # Add extrusion parameter
    return params

g.add_hook(extrude_hook)
g.move(x=10, y=0)   # Will add E=1.0
g.move(x=20, y=10)  # Will add E=1.414
g.move(x=10, y=10)  # Will add E=1.0
g.remove_hook(extrude_hook)
```

For basic extrusion, Gscrib also provides a built-in hook for you:

```python
from gscrib.hooks import extrusion_hook

hook_function = extrusion_hook(
    layer_height = 0.2,
    nozzle_diameter = 0.4,
    filament_diameter = 1.75
)

with g.move_hook(hook_function)
    g.move(x=10, y=0)
```

### Read Device Sensors

In **direct write mode**, machine data such as position, temperature, and
other sensor values can be read directly from the connected device. This
allows the program to be dynamically adjusted based on the current state
of the machine.

```python
g = GCodeBuilder(direct_write="socket")
writer = g.get_writer()

g.query("position")             # Request position data
X = writer.get_parameter("X")   # Get X position
Y = writer.get_parameter("Y")   # Get Y position
Z = writer.get_parameter("Z")   # Get Z position
E = writer.get_parameter("E")   # Get extruder position

g.query("temperature")          # Request temperature data
T = writer.get_parameter("T")   # Get tool temperature
B = writer.get_parameter("B")   # Get bed temperature

g.probe("towards", Z=0, F=100)  # Probe towards Z=0
g.sleep(duration=0)             # Wait for probe to complete
g.query("position")             # Request position
Z = writer.get_parameter("Z")   # Get Z position after probing
```

Some controllers, like Grbl, may not support the ``g.query()`` command.
In such cases, these controllers may automatically report data like
position in real-time without needing a specific query, or raw G-code
such as ``g.write("?")`` can be used to query the position.

### Context Managers

Context managers help you write cleaner, safer code by providing a
convenient way to temporarily modify settings, apply transformations, or
add hooks during operations, and automatically restore the previous state
once the block finishes.

```python
# Switch to absolute positioning for a specific operation
with g.absolute_mode():
    g.rapid(x=0, y=0)

# Switch to relative positioning for a specific operation
with g.relative_mode():
    g.move(x=10)
    g.move(y=10)

# Apply a transformation within a specific context
with g.current_transform():
    g.transform.rotate(angle=45, axis="z")
    g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Restore and apply a named transformation
with g.named_transform("my_transform"):
    g.transform.rotate(angle=45, axis="z")
    g.trace.arc(target=(10, 0), center=(5, 0))

# Add a custom hook for the duration of the operation
with g.move_hook(temporary_hook):
    g.move(x=10, y=10)
```

## Where to Go Next

Ready to go deeper? Explore the [full API reference](#gscrib) for more
examples, tips, and best practices. Start with [GCodeCore](#GCodeCore)
and [GCodeBuilder](#GCodeBuilder), they're the foundation of **Gscrib**.
